Guide for creating new data types (#1394)
compas-dev/compas: docs/devguide/dtypes.rst

Implementing a New Data Type
============================

COMPAS data types are classes that are based on :class:`compas.data.Data`.

Data types can be serialized to JSON with

* :func:`compas.json_dump`
* :func:`compas.json_dumps`
* :func:`compas.json_dumpz`

and deserialized with the corresponding "load" functions

* :func:`compas.json_load`
* :func:`compas.json_loads`
* :func:`compas.json_loadz`

All geometry objects and data structures,
and also, for example, the visualization scene,
are serializable data types.

Creating a new data type
========================

In most cases, it is sufficient to implement the ``__data__`` property when creating your custom `Data` class.

.. code-block:: python

>     class CustomData(Data):

Reviewer: Perhaps nitpicking, but since the word "data" is used a lot in this section, it might be good to find another name for the custom class that is not `CustomData`. Maybe even make it something less abstract, `Brick`? `Building`?

Author: sure but something neutral then, because people get distracted...

Reviewer: Something generic like `Element`, `Entity`, `Item`, or even `ExampleClass`?
Something in the realm of fictional or theoretical geometry like `Hypercube`, `Tesseract`, `KleinBottle`, `Unobtainium`?
Something boring and business-y, like `Customer`, `Person`, `Project`, `Invoice`?
Something silly like `Unicorn`, `Pirate`, `Dinosaur`?
Something of a reference to pop culture, like `Hexahedron`, `Chronohedron`, `Holocron`, `Monolith`, `Vogon`?

            # you should write the following:
            # super(CustomData, self).__init__()
            self.items = []

        @property
        def __data__(self):
            data = super().__data__
            # note that if the code needs to be compatible with IronPython
            # you should write the following:
            # data = super(CustomData, self).__data__
            data['items'] = self.items
            return data

        @classmethod
        def __from_data__(cls, data):
            custom = cls()
            for item in data['items']:
                custom.add(item)
            return custom

        def add(self, item):
            self.items.append(item)

>>> custom = CustomData()
>>> custom.add(1)
>>> custom.add(2)
>>> compas.json_dump(custom, "custom.json")
>>> result = compas.json_load("custom.json")
>>> isinstance(result, CustomData)
True
>>> result.items
[1, 2]

Attribute types
===============

Any attribute that is an instance of a Python base type or a serializable COMPAS data object
can be included in the data dict created by the ``__data__`` property without further processing.

> The serialization process will recursively serialize all these attributes.

Reviewer: So nice to have this decision finally written down/clarified! 💯

Implementing a New Data Type
============================

COMPAS data types are classes that are based on :class:`compas.data.Data`.

Data types can be serialized to JSON with

* :func:`compas.json_dump`
* :func:`compas.json_dumps`
* :func:`compas.json_dumpz`

and deserialized with the corresponding "load" functions

* :func:`compas.json_load`
* :func:`compas.json_loads`
* :func:`compas.json_loadz`

All geometry objects and data structures,
and also, for example, the visualization scene,
are serializable data types.

Creating a new data type
========================

> In most cases, to create a new data type it is sufficient to implement the ``__data__`` property
> of your custom data class.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In most cases, it is sufficient to implement the ``__data__`` property when creating your custom `Data` class.
```

.. code-block:: python

    class CustomData(Data):

        def __init__(self, a, b, name=None)
            super(CustomData, self).__init__(name=name)
            self.a = a
            self.b = b

        @property
        def __data__(self):
            data = super(CustomData, self).__data__
            data['a'] = self.a
            data['b'] = self.b
            return data

>>> custom = CustomData(a=1, b=2)
>>> compas.json_dump(custom, "custom.json")
>>> result = compas.json_load("custom.json")
>>> isinstance(result, CustomData)
True
>>> result.a
1
>>> result.b
2

If the attributes stored in the data dictionary defined by the ``__data__`` property
are different from the initialization parameters of the class,

> you also have to customize the ``__from_data__`` class method to compensate for the difference.

Reviewer 2: I don't know if the Internet Best Practice is a thing here, but there is this [Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels ](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt) I find very clear.

For example here, 
```suggestion
you must also customize the ``__from_data__`` class method to compensate for the difference.
```

            # you should write the following:
            # super(CustomData, self).__init__()
            self.items = []

        @property
        def __data__(self):
            data = super().__data__
            # note that if the code needs to be compatible with IronPython
            # you should write the following:
            # data = super(CustomData, self).__data__
            data['items'] = self.items
            return data

        @classmethod
        def __from_data__(cls, data):
            custom = cls()
            for item in data['items']:
                custom.add(item)
            return custom

        def add(self, item):
            self.items.append(item)

>>> custom = CustomData()
>>> custom.add(1)
>>> custom.add(2)
>>> compas.json_dump(custom, "custom.json")
>>> result = compas.json_load("custom.json")
>>> isinstance(result, CustomData)
True
>>> result.items
[1, 2]

Attribute types
===============

Any attribute that is an instance of a Python base type or a serializable COMPAS data object
can be included in the data dict created by the ``__data__`` property without further processing.

> The serialization process will take care of all required conversions automatically.

Reviewer 2: Do you want to mention the recursive nature here?
```suggestion
The serialization process will recursively serialize all these attributes.
```

.. code-block:: python

    class CustomData(Data):
        
        def __init__(self, point, frame, mesh, name=None):
            super().__init__(name=name)
            self.point = point
            self.frame = frame
            self.mesh = mesh

        @property
        def __data__(self):
            return {
                "point": self.point,
                "frame": self.frame,
                "mesh": self.mesh,
            }

>>> import compas
>>> from compas.geometry import Point, Frame
>>> from compas.datastructures import Mesh
>>> point = Point(1, 2, 3)
>>> frame = Frame()
>>> mesh = Mesh.from_meshgrid(10, 10)
>>> custom = CustomData(point, frame, mesh)
>>> compas.json_dump(custom, "custom.json")
>>> result = compas.json_load("custom.json")
>>> isinstance(result.point, Point)
True
>>> isinstance(result.frame, Frame)
True
>>> isinstance(result.mesh, Mesh)
True
>>> result.point == point
True
>>> result.point is point
False

> Note that when many instances of a type like this have to serialized/deserialized,
> letting the encoders and decoders that care of this automatically,
> can unnecessarily increase the size of the JSON file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the the automatic serialization process will incur overhead information
that increases the size of the resulting JSON file.
The performance impact may be significant when many of these instances are serialized.
```

Reviewer 2: Just trying to offer a more neutral explanation tone here. See if you like it.

Implementing a New Data Type
============================

COMPAS data types are classes that are based on :class:`compas.data.Data`.

> Data types can be serialised to JSON with

Reviewer: US-spelling police :P 

```suggestion
Data types can be serialized to JSON with
```

Author: and we like US spelling because...?

Reviewer 3: I personally like US spelling better too... feels more common as a default

Reviewer: Yep, but also because we agreed on it long ago, so most docs are already US spelling

* :func:`compas.json_dump`
* :func:`compas.json_dumps`
* :func:`compas.json_dumpz`

> and deserialised with the corresponding "load" functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and deserialized with the corresponding "load" functions
```

* :func:`compas.json_load`
* :func:`compas.json_loads`
* :func:`compas.json_loadz`

All geometry objects and data structures,
and also, for example, the visualisation scene,

> are data types.

Reviewer: maybe add an extra qualifier to point to "the data types that we care about", because technically, any class is a data type.

```suggestion
are serializable data types.
```

Creating a new data type
========================

A new data type can be created in a few simple steps.

.. code-block:: python

    class CustomData(Data):

>         def __init__(self, a=None, b=None, name=None)

Reviewer 4: making all arguments optional is something we were forced to do when we still had the `@data.setter`. As we don't have that anymore, I don't think we need to imply this is necessary.

Author: personally, i prefer to have all "constructor" parameters defined as keyword arguments.
in any case, the default serialisation behaviour is that the data is expanded as `kwargs` during reconstruction.
so we have to check properly what the different options are...

Reviewer 4: sure, but isn't that related more to how you implement `__data__` rather than what's declared in `__init__`? 
shouldn't `None` default only be assigned to arguments that are not mandatory for creating a valid instance of `CustomData`?

            super().__init__(name=name)
            self.a = a
            self.b = b

        @property
        def __data__(self):

>             data = super().__data__

Reviewer: This syntax only works for Python 3, right? In particular the property getting I think

            data['a'] = self.a
            data['b'] = self.b
            return data

>>> data = CustomData(a=1, b=2)
>>> compas.json_dump(data, "custom.json")
>>> result = compas.json_load("custom.json")
>>> isinstance(result, CustomData)
True
>>> result.a
1
>>> result.b
2

Attribute types
===============

More info coming soon...

.. note::

    Note that this process can be further simplified
    by leveraging the ``__annotations__`` infrastructure of Python 3.
    This will be introduced in the next major COMPAS release.

Extending an existing data type
===============================

More info coming soon...

Special Cases
=============

> More info coming soon...

Reviewer: I don't like the "more to come" because we don't really go back to them, better leave it short and to the point

Author: will fill them in. is just a draft doc...
